Rework the architecture page & diagrams (#160)
PennyLaneAI/catalyst: doc/dev/architecture.rst

   <br />

> The Catalyst stack leverages state-of-the-art technologies to accelerate quantum workflows without

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Catalyst stack leverages state-of-the-art technologies to accelerate hybrid quantum-classical workflows without
```

> losing the ability to quickly prototype in Python. Some of the projects Catalyst builds upon include
> the `MLIR <https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/>`_ and `LLVM <https://llvm.org/>`_ compiler frameworks, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
losing the ability to quickly prototype in Python. To do so, Catalyst builds upon include
the `MLIR <https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/>`_ and `LLVM <https://llvm.org/>`_ compiler frameworks, the
```

Author: I don't think the new sentence makes grammatical sense 😅

Reviewer: Oops! Yes I meant to also remove include!

  growing library of compilation passes.
  Targets LLVM IR with QIR syntax for code generation.

- **Runtime:** A runtime library for execution of hybrid quantum programs.
  While classical computation is compiled to native code, all quantum functionality is managed and
  provided by the runtime as an interface layer to backend devices (such as CPU simulators, GPU
  simulators, and hardware).

Frontend
^^^^^^^^

An overview of the Python frontend is presented below. At the moment, the frontend is not only
responsible for converting user programs to the compiler IR, but also comes with a compiler driver
that manages the entire compilation pipeline.

|br|

.. image:: ../_static/arch/frontend.svg
  :width: 800
  :alt: Frontend
  :align: center

|br|

Compilation happens in 3 stages which are successively invoked by the frontend and compiler driver:

- **Program Capture / IR Generation:** The frontend primarily provides a method for hybrid program
  capture of PennyLane/JAX programs. This uses the tracing & op queueing mechanism of both
  frameworks, extending the JAX program representation
  (`JAXPR <https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jaxpr.html>`_) with quantum

>   `primitives <https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/How_JAX_primitives_work.html>`_).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `primitives <https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/How_JAX_primitives_work.html>`_.
```

>   Custom JAXPR -> MLIR lowerings are registered to these primitives to fully convert a hybrid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Custom JAXPR → MLIR lowerings are registered to these primitives to fully convert a hybrid
```

Author: 🤯

  program to MLIR for consumption by the compiler.

- **Program Transformation:** The main part of compilation is performed on the MLIR-based
  representation for hybrid quantum programs defined by Catalyst. The user program is passed to
  the Catalyst compiler libraries in its textual form, as the MLIR memory objects are not
  compatible between Catalyst and ``jaxlib``. The driver then invokes a sequence of transformations
  that *lowers* the user program to a lower level of abstraction, outputting LLVM IR with QIR
  syntax.

>   For more details consult the :ref:`next section<compiler>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For more details consult the :ref:`compiler section<compiler>`.
```

  by the user.
  For more details on the program execution consult the :ref:`runtime section<runtime>`.

Elaborating on the program capture phase, tracing is a mechanism by which a function is executed
with abstract arguments called *tracers*. Calling operations from the tracing library (such as
``jax.numpy``) will record the operation and which tracers (or constants) it acts upon in a global
data structure. Note that JAX's tracing contexts are thread-local and can be nested to allow scoped
region capture, which is relevant when tracing control flow operations.

During the tracing of quantum functions (``qml.qnode``), PennyLane's queuing context is activated to
build a ``QuantumTape`` data structure that records all quantum operations. Nested queuing contexts
are leveraged to allow for scoped operation capture, including control flow operations which are
themselves captured as pseudo-quantum operations on the tape.

Catalyst provides the "glue" to embed quantum tapes into the JAXPR, by converting PennyLane
operations to their corresponding JAX primitive and by connecting operation arguments/results to

> the correct tracer objects.

Reviewer: @dime10 should we add?

```suggestion
the correct tracer objects.

.. seealso:: For more details on the frontend code organization see :doc:`/modules/frontend`.
```

Author: Sure :)

.. _compiler:

Compiler Core
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This section will focus on the series of compiler passes that convert a high-level quantum program
to its low-level LLVM IR and subsequent binary form. While the exact passes may frequently change,
the general stages should still be applicable.
See the graph below for an overview of the transformations applied to the user program:

|br|

.. image:: ../_static/arch/compiler.svg
  :width: 800
  :alt: Compiler Core
  :align: center

|br|

> - **HLO lowering:**

Reviewer: @dime10 since these are numbered steps, should they be instead?
```suggestion
1. **HLO lowering:**
```

(and same for the ones that follow)

Reviewer: Note if this change is accepted, you will need to indent by an extra space the nested bullet points below :(

Author: Well they mostly are ordered but not necessarily (e.g. the way quantum and classical optimizations appear is not necessarily implying a fixed order). I would prefer to keep an unordered list :)

- **Enzyme auto-differentiation:**

  - Functions that have been set-up to be differentiated via Enzyme will be transformed at this
    stage. The separately compiled Enzyme library is loaded into the LLVM ``opt`` tool to perform
    the relevant code transformations.

- **LLVM optimizations:**

  - The ``opt`` tool can also be used to run additional LLVM passes at this point, such as
    optimizations.

  - For quantum bound programs, optimizations at this stage may see little benefit however, and are
    generally better left out to save on compilation time.

- **Native code generation:**

  - The LLVM static compiler (``llc``) is invoked to perform code generation for the local target
    architecture. A single object file is produced for the entire user program.

- **Linking:**

  - Using a linker available on the system, the user program is linked against the Catalyst runtime.
    To simplify the process, a compiler will be used to drive the linking process, such as
    ``clang``, ``gcc``, or ``c99``.

  - The shared library produced by the linking step is the output of the compilation process.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. seealso:: For more details on the compiler code organization see :doc:`/modules/mlir`.
```

    without being constrained by what may or may not be available in the (primarily) quantum
    assembly.

  - **Circuit execution:** Upon completion of the quantum function the generated assembly can
    be sent off to local or remote services for execution. Typically, this involves a much
    higher latency than when executing programs via the runtime directly. As an example,
    Catalyst currently connects to the AWS Braket cloud service for remote execution on NISQ
    hardware, but the full list of supported backends should always be obtained from the
    documentation.

  Circuit execution calls are made in a blocking fashion and will wait until all results are
  returned from the device. This mode also limits the interaction that host code can have with
  device code, such as real-time measurement feedback.

- **Classical memory management:** In order to simplify the bufferization phase in the compiler,
  memory allocations that are returned from functions are allowed to remain live until the end of
  the program. The runtime tracks all allocation requests made by the program and will
  automatically deallocate all remaining buffers by the end of the program's execution.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. seealso:: For more details on the runtime code organization see :doc:`/modules/runtime`.
```

  the Catalyst compiler libraries in its textual form, as the MLIR memory objects are not
  compatible between Catalyst and ``jaxlib``. The driver then invokes a sequence of transformations
  that *lowers* the user program to a lower level of abstraction, outputting LLVM IR with QIR
  syntax.
  For more details consult the :ref:`compiler section<compiler>`.

- **Code Generation:** At this stage the LLVM IR is compiled down to native object code using the
  LLVM Static Compiler (``llc``) for the local system architecture. A native linker is then used
  to link the user program to the Catalyst Runtime library. The frontend will load this library
  into the Python environment and attach its entry point to the callable ``@qjit`` object defined
  by the user.
  For more details on the program execution consult the :ref:`runtime section<runtime>`.

Elaborating on the program capture phase, tracing is a mechanism by which a function is executed
with abstract arguments called *tracers*. Calling operations from the tracing library (such as
``jax.numpy``) will record the operation and which tracers (or constants) it acts upon in a global

> data structure. Note that JAX's tracing contexts are thread-local and can be nested to allow scoped
> region capture, which is relevant when tracing control flow operations.

Author: ```suggestion
data structure. Note that JAX's tracing contexts can be nested to allow scoped region capture,
which is relevant when tracing control flow operations.
```
